A neuronal learning rule for aee = ee Seana sub-milliseconda temporal Oeare - TN yooAS / = co / T | coding = |i) vi J.WulframLeo van Gerstner*+,Hemmen* &RichardHermann Kempter*, Wagnert+ 5 (| '1 = * 2 oO Physik-Department and + Fakultat flr Chemie und Biologie, oO Technische Universitat; Munchen, D-85747 Garching bei Munchen, 0 Germany aa a es A paARADOX that exists in auditory and electrosensory neural C5 systems!” is that they encode behaviourally relevant signals in 0 the range of a few microseconds with neurons that are at least one = order of magnitude slower. The importance of temporal coding in 0 0 1 neural information processing is not clear yet**. A central t (ms) question is whether neuronal firing can be more precise than the time constants of the neuronal processes involved’. Here we FIG. 1 a, Membrane potential v of an integrate-and-fire neuron as a address this problem using the auditory system of the barn owl as function of time. b, Probability density P(t) of presynaptic firing during 5- an example. We present a modelling study based on computer kHz stimulation and four samples of input spike trains (vertical bars). The simulations of a neuron in the laminar nucleus. Three observamodel neuron receives input from 154 presynaptic neurons’* in volleys of tions explain the paradox. First, spiking of an ‘integrate-and-fire’ phase-locked spikes with a ‘jitter’ of 40 us drivenby a S-kHz tone. Spikes neuron driven by excitatory postsynaptic potentials with a width are generated by a stochastic process with periodically modulated rate at half-maximum height of 250 us, ? has an accuracy of 25 ps if the (solid line in b). A histogram of spike arrival times (number of spikes N, in tic si 1 . h veatee tly. S d. th bins of 5 us) summed over all 154 synapses is shown in c. Each input spike duringegree ofafontogenetic Icco **her** enceon s development **in** thethe signaco **l** arbyarrivalvirtuey i time:timesof an,canunsupervised>be» alst **taine** d thetheevokeinmembrane **s** et an of e.p.s.p.a. Thevoltage showne.p.s.psv (a, on an main from enlarged figure).all neurons voltage scaleWith theare addedspike (sameinputlinearly showntime and scale) incyieldthe in hebbian learning rule. Learning selects connections with matchmembrane voltage exhibits oscillations (solid line). The model neuron fires ing delays from a broad distribution of axons with random delays. (arrow), if v reaches a threshold v. Firing must always occur during the time Third, the learning rule also selects the correct delays from two wheny increases so that, in the case of coherent input, output spikes are independent groups of inputs, for example, from the left and right phase locked as well. If input spikes arrive incoherently, v follows a trajectory ear. with statistical fluctuations, but no systematic oscillations (dashed line) and Barn owls use interaural time differences for azimuthal sound the output spikes are not phase locked. Time scales in a—c are identical; the localization""'... . Theyy can locate sounds. and hence prey, with a period T = 200 us is indicated by a horizontal bar. Voltage in a: arbitrary precision of 1-2 degrees’’*,2 a capabilitya. that requirpr **e** sy, a tw **i** t me units;in kHz. the threshold v is 36 times the amplitude of a single e.p.s.p. Rate in b resolution of less than 5s (ref. 11). The key process in the METHODS. The differential equation dv/dt = —v/t,, + I(t) has been inteauditory system is ‘phase locking’: spikes occur preferentially at grated (time step 5us) with an effective membrane time constant a certain phase, termed the ‘mean phase’, of a stimulating tone, at Tt = 100 ps. An input spike arriving at time t/ at a synapse j evokes an frequencies up to 8 kHz (ref. 13). To understand the high degree input current 1} (t) = (1/t,) exp(—(t - t)) /t.) fort < t) with 1, = 100 ps. of temporal precision in phase locking, we must consider both the —_‘The total input is /(t) = }7)+ Jj//(t) whereJ, is the efficacy of synapsej and typical duration (z,) of the synaptic input current and the memthe sum runs over all synapses and firing times preceding t. For each input : ma. : > P(t) braneraethough ‘he timethtants constant of synape(t,,): cFor input auditory are In neurons the range in re the chicken'*' HS.ne POarate,= (aTT =7 200/oVaoe ps21) isYom the period exp[—(tOL of (fmtthe— stimulation tone,mT — A,)*°/20*]2 2) Wherewhere A, is the nx = transmis- 1kHz isdensity the the passive membrane time constant is about 2 ms (ref. ), sion delay from the ear to the laminar nucleus, and o = 40us is the effective membrane time constant (see Fig. 1, methods) of temporal jitter. We impose absolute refactoriness through a minimal magnocellular and laminar neurons is shorter than 200 ps because interspike interval of 0.5 ms. For incoherent spike arrival (dashed line in there is an outward rectifying current that is activated above the a), the transmission delays A, are drawn from the broad distribution of Fig. resting potential’*. Such outward rectifying currents are com2a, for coherent spike arrival (solid line in a) the delay distribution is that of monly found in phase-locking neurons of the auditory Fig. 2c. To define the effective time constant t,, of the integrate-and-fire system!*"7, As a result of the short time constants. the width of model, we started from a more detailed model with an explicit description of single excitatory postsynaptic potentials (e.p.s.ps) in chicken is eae rectifying current**"*. See Supplementary Information for about 500-800 1s at half maximum amplitude’’. We assume that , laminar neurons in an auditory specialist like the barn owl are . . . twice as fast as those in chicken and model e.p.s.ps with a width of Spikes from more than 100 presynaptic neurons (Fig. 1c) 250 us (Fig. 1a, inset). produce e.p.s.ps that arrive coherently with a common mean We concentrate on a single-frequency channel and stimulate phase and lead to an oscillating membrane potential ’- The with a pure tone of, for example, 5 kHz (period T = 200 us). The membrane potential builds up, reaches the threshold in the input from magnocellular neurons to our ‘integrate-and-fire’ rising stage of the cycle and in this way produces slightly more model neuron in the laminar nucleus is described as a sequence accurate phase locking than that of ne ee (Fig. ‘4). If of spikes (Fig. 1b). Presynaptic spikes occur preferentially arounda PFESYNAPUC SPIKES ATTIVe WIT TANCOM PHASes, TOWEVET, V STIOWS specific mean phase of the tone”.A ‘jitter’ of40 ps models internal aperiodic fluctuations (Fig. 1a), and the output spikes have a sources of variability and noise along the auditory pathway as well uniform phase distribution (Fig. 2a). We expect this to be the as the bandwidth of frequency tuning of auditory neurons. The initial, embryonic condition before the connections between the mean firing rate is relatively low (667 Hz) so that each presynaptic magnocellular and the laminar nucleus are tuned during a sensispike train skips most of the cycles of the 5 kHz tone tive period In adult owls, transmission delays from the ear to the : laminar nucleus differ greatly. Their mean value is between 2 and + Present addresses: Ecole Polytechnique Fédéralede Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (W.G.) and 3 ms, and the standard deviation 1S about 200-240 Hs (ref. 19). RWTH Aachen, Institut fir Biologie Il, Kopernikusstr. 16, D-52074 Aachen, Germany (H.W.) Without tuning of the delays, any phase information would be lost. 76 NATURE - VOL 383 - 5 SEPTEMBER 1996 

**==> picture [136 x 11] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
LETTERS TO NATURE<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [515 x 715] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
FIG. 2 Hebbian learning. In a—c, the left-hand graph shows synapses a 10<br>binned as a function of the signal transmission delay A. On the right-hand il 200<br>side, the distributions of output phases are shown in period histograms (bin |<br>width 5s). a, Before learning, there are 600 synapses with a broad Ul ally) |.<br>distribution of signal transmission delays (left) drawn from a gaussian o je i eeu lin y | Pe il<br>distribution (2.5+0.3ms). The output of the laminar model neuron b<br>shows no phase locking to a 2-kHz (not shown) or a 5-kHz signal (right). § 10 §<br>b, Aftera learning session while being stimulated by a 2-kHz signal. The 105 5 B soo<br>synapses that survive learning have delays which differ by multiples of the a. i| o<br>period T = 500 ps (scale bar). The output spikes exhibit phase locking with s g<br>vector strength®? v = 0.97 corresponding to a temporal precision of 20 us a 0 B® o<br>(right). c, Same plot as in b, after learning a 5-kHz input signal. 154<br>saturated synapses survive. The output spikes exhibit phase locking € 10<br>(v = 0.75) corresponding to a temporal precision of 25s. d, Learning T ~~ 200 |<br>window W as a function of the delay s between postsynaptic firing and i i<br>presynaptic spike arrival. The graph on the right-hand side shows the boxed | ii<br>region around the maximum on an expanded scale. If W(s) is positive 0 a a 0 uu<br>(negative) for some s, the synaptic efficacy is increased (decreased). The 15 2.5 3.5 0 no en<br>postsynaptic firing occurs at s = O (vertical dashed line). Learning is most A (ms) ®<br>efficient if presynaptic spikes arrive shortly before the postsynaptic neuron d<br>startspostsynapticfiring asspikein issynapse weakened.A. Another synapse B which fires after the 0.2 A/\ 0.3 !<br>METHODS. Before learning, all synapses have identical efficacies s<br>J,=1. During learning, efficacies are changed according to = 0.0 ~<br>MU =edy[y + 2, W(t — t”)] with factors ¢ = 0.002, y = 0.1. The sum S<br>runs over all spike arrival times t; < t and all postsynaptic firings t” < t. -0.2 6 3<br>We take W(s) =0.3exp[(s+0.05)/0.5) for s<-—0.05 and "  s(ms) 0.2<br>W(s) = 0.5 exp{[—(s + 0.05)/0.5] — 0.2 exp[—(s + 0.05)/5] for s> ; A<br>time steps of 5s. The synaptic strength saturates at a maximum of 3. A en ie -0.4 0 0.1<br>—0.05 wheres is a time in ms. Learning occurs during 3,000 seconds in A : Be<br>synapse whoseefficacy vanishes is removed. The efficiency of phase locking B : B s(ms)<br>is quantified by the vector strength?®. Spike input and electrical time<br>constants are as in Fig. 1.<br>A hebbian learning rule proves to be an efficient tuning mechan- slightly before the postsynaptic firing will be strengthened. If<br>ism. 5 = —1,/2, the maximal increase of synaptic efficacy occurs at<br>In hebbian learning, a synaptic efficacy is changed by a small those synapses which are already strongest.<br>amount ¢«, if presynaptic spike arrival and postsynaptic firing So far we have considered monoaural input, but laminar<br>coincide. This simultaneity constraint is implemented by a learn- neurons also exhibit a sensitivity to the interaural time difference<br>ing window Ws) wheres is the difference between the arrival time (ITD)'’"5, We divide the synapses into two groups, with input<br>of a presynaptic spike and the postsynaptic firing. In our model, from the left or the right ear. During learning, both ears are<br>W(s) has two regimes (Fig. 2d). For s < 0, W(s) is positive. Thus, stimulated by the same signal and with a fixed ITD. The learning<br>the efficacy of synapses which are repeatedly active shortly before rule selects synaptic connections so that spikes arrive coherently<br>a postsynaptic spike occurs, is increased*”’**. The efficacy of for exactly this ITD. If the same ITD is used after learning, the<br>synapses which are active shortly after the postsynaptic spike is neuron is driven optimally and emits phase-lock spikes. If the ITD<br>decreased**™*, As depolarization is known to induce potentiation<br>of active synapses” and as the neuron is depolarized most of the<br>time between two spikes, we also strengthen each active synapse a C 10<br>by a small amount y, even if no postsynaptic spike occurs. The 0.2 <<br>procedure of continuously strengthening and weakening the z 2 fy<br>synapses automatically leads to a normalization of the total @ 0.1 B05 7<br>input strength to the postsynaptic neuron in a competitive self- & 2 “sy,<br>organized process. 0 0.0 a<br>As a result of learning, a clearly structured distribution of :<br>synapses evolves (Fig. 2b, c). Delays of the remaining synapses b 1.0 d 1.0<br>differ roughly by multiples of the period T of the stimulating tone. % E S x<br>BeforeF learning, the cell was not- tuned to this period.:  The final: B055 | ES55 05 re *<br>synaptic pattern of a neuron stimulated by a 2-kHz signal during 2 xe<br>learning is different from that of a S-kHz neuron (Fig. 25, c). 3 sa 25 ITD=0<br>The evolution of synaptic efficacy during learning does not S$ 0.0 > 00<br>depend on the specific shape of the learning window W [but][ only][ on] “0 Tl T 0.0 0.5 1.0<br>some generic properties. In particular, the learning window can ITD Tm (ms)<br>extend over several milliseconds” and therefore is large compared<br>with the period T of the sound (Fig. 2d). Efficient learning FIG. 3 a, b, Turning to interaural time difference (ITD). The output rate (a)<br>depends on the temporal relationship between the process of and the vector strength (6) of a laminar neuron are shown as a function of<br>strengthening the synaptic efficacies and that of weakening them. ITD. The model neuron has been tuned to a 5kHz signal (T = 200 ps) as<br>The maximum of the window function W(s) should be at a location described in the text and the legend of Fig. 2. Half of the 154 synapses<br>3 =~ —t,/2 where t, is the rise time of the postsynaptic potential which survive learning transmit signals from the left ear, the others from the<br>(Fig. 2d). This can be understood as follows. Let us assume that ren car The neuron exhibits best phase locking and maximal output rate<br>learning has led to a sharply peaked distribution with all synapses max for the interaural delay used during learning (ITD = 0). The rate has a<br>. : a minimum f,,i, for TD = T/2. c, d, Effect of t,,. We define the modulation as<br>having a common delay A (modulo T). Coherent input arriving at (Fimax — fmin)/fmax and plot the modulation as a function of the effective<br>the synapses can trigger a postsynaptic spike with a mean delay of membrane time constant r,, inc. The vector strength at ITD = O is shown as<br>roughly t,/2. Because of learning, all synapses which are active a function of t,, in d.<br>NATURE - VOL 383 - 5 SEPTEMBER 1996 77<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


LETTERS TO NATURE al accurately by a hebbian learning rule. It is tempting to apply the z ene 2 50 ms same ideas to information processing in the hippocampus’, the md a ene 4—+ 100 ms cerebellum”, or the cortex’. If we increase time constants by a g 10 “ea #200 ms factor of about 100 and reinterpret our results, then we are led to Z3 Toorn nnn nee ~OSeg tooo~Soel 7 theconstantscodeconclusionwith arean accuracyin thethat rangeinofareas order1-3 mswhere of would 10-20effectivebe mspossible.(ref.membrane30), a temporaltimeoO ' 10 10° 10° aC:CTC TT Number of neurons Received 24 April; accepted 4 July 1996. 1. Carr, C. E. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 223-243 (1993). FIG. 4 Population coding. The temporal precision that can be achieved in a 3 hepteld a. Nature 378, 33.36 (1995). (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1991). population of N independent neurons is shown asa function of N under the 4. Bialek, W., Rieke, F., de Ruyter van Steveninck, R. R. & Warland, D. Science 252, 1854-1857 assumption of population vector coding?”8. The ITD is estimated based on (1991). gles),spikesoroccurring 200 ms (stars).in a time Thewindow accuracy of tis = defined50 ms as(squares), the average100 deviation ms (trian-of 5.6. tes.Shadien,40M. (SoresN. & Newsome, Now verW.T.1994)"Curr. i (edsOpin. Neurobiol. Domany, E.,4, 569-579van Hemmen,(1994). J. L. & Schulten, K.) the estimate from the actual ITD of the stimulus. The horizontal line at 5 ps is 7. Softky, W. R. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 8, 239-247 (1995). theangle’?.boundary given by the behavioural performance of 1-2° of azimuthal 8. Mainen, Z. F. & Sejnowski,T. J. Science 268, 1503-1506 (1995). central limitFor theorem. large N, the accuracy scales as 1/\/tN as expected from the 1011. JattMoiseff, A.LAS & Konishi,comp,M.PryciotJ. Comp.PoveholPhysiol.a4,A 36-39144, 299-304(1948), (1981). Fig.METHODS. We took N neurons 1<k <N with ITD tuning curves similar to 12. Knudsen, E. |., Blasdel, G. G. & Konishi,M. J.Comp. Physiol. 133, 1-11 (1979). the 3a,ITD and approximated Tthe periodbyof f,(x) the = stimulation, 164 + 36 x, cos|(xis the —optimal x,)2x/T]ITD ofHz where neuron x isk rh15, Roves,Reyes,etA. D..FuelRubel, EW.E. W. && Spain,Spain, Wd. W. J.J.;"Neurosci.Neurosci, 16,14, 993-1007 5362. 5364(1996). (1994) and f, its mean firing rate in Hz. The values of x, have a uniform distribution 16. Manis, P. B. & Marx, S. O. J. Neurosci, 11, 2865-2880 (1991). between 0 and T. Spikes of neuron k are generated by a Poisson process io re aces in Hearing Research (eds Manley, GA. eta.) 24-30 (World Scienti with mean rate f,. In an additional simulation (data not shown) we have "Singapore, 1995). g Ya Eat crentine, confirmed that Poisson statistics give a reasonable assumption and these 19. Carr, C. E. & Konishi, M.J. Neurosci. 10, 3227-3246 (1990). results do not change, if we generate spikes by a model neuron as in Fig. 1. 20. Hebb, D. 0. The Organization of Behavior (Wiley, New York, 1949). The ITD of the stimulus is estimated as?’ x°* = (T/2z) arg(3>,.n,e?/") oO Bree TV P& Colingrdge.Sera teee dee 60, 457-467 (1989). wherelength n,t. isWe theplot number the accuracy of spikes((|x** of neuron — x|")""” kmeasuredwhere thein aangular time-windowbrackets of 23. (1994).pebanne,D., Gahwiler, B. H. & Thompson, S. M. Proc, Nat! Acad. Sci. USA 94, 1148-1152 denote an average over 20,000 trials. 28, Goldberg, JM. & Brown, P. 8. Neurophysiol 82, 613.636 (1969). 26. Yin, T. C. T. & Chan, J. C. K. J. Neurophysiol. 64, 465-488 (1990). does not match, phase locking of the output spikes breaks down 27.28. Georgopoulos,Salinas, E. & Abbott,A. P., Schwartz,L. F. J. Comput.A. B. &Neurosci. Kettner, R.2, 87-107E. Science(1994). 233, 1416-1419 (1986). andTemporal the mean firing rate decreases (Fig. 3a, b). ; 20. Bomancer'®., Douglas, RanMartin, KAC. &Koch, ©. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci, USA 88, 11569limited. information conveyed by a single laminar neuron is 11571 (1994). (Fig. 2) Theand **t** heemporalITD tuning precisioncurve of phaseis only locking weakly ismodulated about 20-25(Fig. Hs requestsSUPPLEMENTARY may also INFORMATION.be addressed Availableto Mary Sheehan on Nature’sat the World-WideLondon editorial Web siteoffice http:/Awww. of Nature.nature.com; 3a). Nevertheless, barn owls achieve a behavioural performance ; a reaction time of about 100 ms before it initiates a head movement”. During 100 ms the firing pattern ofa population of laminar Hontmer@physik tmmuenchon, dey._ materials should be addressed to J.L.v.H. (e-mail: Leo.van. neurons potentially contains enough information to resolve ITDs with a precision of 5 ps. We consider a group of laminar neurons with ITD tuning curves as in Fig. 3a, but shifted along the ITD axis so that the optimal responses occur at different ITDs. Neurons are stimulated by a = . tone with a fixed, but unknown, ITD. We estimate the ITD from Thalamic modulation of the neuronal firing pattern by a ‘population vector’ decoding . . . scheme’’”: the ITD corresponding to the optimal response of high-frequency oscillating eachnumber neuron of spikesis noted, that occurand each in a value time windowis weighted of according 100 ms. Weto findthe potentials. "in auditory. cortex that the activity of about 100 independent neurons provides enough information to estimate the ITD with a precision of 5 ps Daniel S. Barth & Kurt D. MacDonald (Fig. 4) apart from ambiguities that are caused by periodicity of the signal. Weak correlations from common inputs rescale the Department of Psychology, C.B. 345, University of Colorado, Boulder, absolute values but do not alter the conclusions. Colorado 80309-345, USA The firing precision of 20-25 us of single neurons has been —_[>] achieved despite the fact that input spikes evoke e.p.s.p.s which Peruaps the most widely recognized but least understood electroare ten times broader. In an additional set of simulations, we have physiological activity of the cerebral cortex is its characteristic systematically varied the effective membrane time constant t,, and electrical oscillations. Recently, there have been efforts to underhence the width of the e.p.s.p. We find that the temporal precision stand the mechanisms underlying high-frequency gamma oscillaof neuronal spiking depends only weakly on t,, (Fig. 3d). This is tions (~40 Hz) because they may coordinate sensory processing possible because firing always occurs during the rise time of a between populations of cortical cells'”. High-resolution cortical postsynaptic potential. On the other hand, for a 5-kHz signal, ITD recordings show that gamma oscillations are constrained to tuning breaks down rapidly, if t,, exceeds 0.1 ms (Fig. 3c). Thus sensory cortex*', that they occur independently in auditory and modulation of ITD tuning does indeed require short e.p.s.p.s. In somatosensory cortex‘, and that they are phase-locked between fact, very short time constants have been measured'*". primary and secondary sensory cortex’. As yet, the mechanism of Our results show that the temporal precision of output spikes their neurogenesis is unknown’. Whereas cortical neurons can need not be limited by the membrane time constant. Spike timing produce gamma oscillations without subcortical input*’, they can achieve a resolution shorter than the rise time of an e.p.s.p. may also be modulated by the thalamus” and basal forebrain”. given coherent spike arrival; and spike arrival times can be tuned Here we report that the neural generator of gamma oscillations in 78 NATURE - VOL 383 - 5 SEPTEMBER 1996 

