Neural Networks, Vol. 10, No. 9, pp. 1659-1671, 1997 © 1997 Elsevier Science PrintedLtd.Ltd. AllinrightsGreatreservedBritain 0893-6080/97 $17.00+.00 

## Pergamon © 1997 Elsevier Science PrintedLtd.Ltd. 0893-6080/97 PIT: S0893-6080(97)00011-7 CONTRIBUTED ARTICLE Networks of Spiking Neurons: The Third Generation of Neural Network Models WOLFGANG MAASS 

Institute for Theoretical Computer Science, Technische Universitit Graz (Received 27 March 1996; accepted 10 November 1996) 

Abstract—The computational power offormal models for networks of spiking neurons is compared with that of other neural network models based on McCulloch Pitts neurons (i.e., threshold gates), respectively, sigmoidal gates. In particular it is shown that networks of spiking neurons are, with regard to the number of neurons that are needed, computationally more powerful than these other neural network models. A concrete biologically relevant function is exhibited which can be computed by a single spiking neuron (for biologically reasonable values of its parameters), but which requires hundreds of hidden units on a sigmoidal neural net. On the other hand, it is known that any function that can be computed by a small sigmoidal neural net can also be computed by a small network of spiking neurons. This article does not assume prior knowledge about spiking neurons, and it contains an extensive list of references to the currently available literature on computations in networks of spiking neurons and relevant results from neurobiology. © 1997 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. 

Keywords—Spiking neuron, Integrate-and-fire neutron, Computational complexity, Sigmoidal neural nets, Lower bounds. 

1. DEFINITIONS AND MOTIVATIONS saturated function « with 7(y) = yforO = y = 1, 70) = If one classifies. neural network models according. to their. 0 for y*y < 0, a(y)0) .= 1 for yy > 1. Besides'S Piespiecewise. . . Noreaee . polynomial activation functions we consider in this computational units, one can distinguish three different bas : easy er : . . paper also ‘‘piecewise exponential’’ activation funcgenerations. The first generation is based on . : . . . . . tions, whose pieces can be defined by expressions involMcCulloch—Pitts neurons as computational units. . aor ae . These are also referred to as perceptrons or threshold ving exponentiation (such as thef definition of a). Typical. gates. They giveoorise to a variety: of neural network modexamples for networks from. this. second generation are els such as multilayer. perceptrons (also called threshold feedforward and recurrent: . sigmoidal. neural. nets, as well oo. . as networks of radial basis function units. These nets are circuits), Hopfield nets, and Boltzmann machines. A : . wae . also able to compute (with the help of thresholding at the characteristic feature of these models is that they can . . . only give. digital.. output. In fact they are universal. for network output) arbitrary boolean functions. Actually it ; . ara has been shown that neural nets from the second generacomputations with digital input and output, and every . ; . . boolean function. can be computed by some multilayer. tion can compute certain boolean functions : with fewer perceptron with. a single. hidden: layer. gates . than neural nets from the first generation (Maass,. The second generationoeis based on computational. units. Schnitger, & weSontag, 1991; DasGupta & Schnitger, that apply an Parner‘‘activation function’’Sererwith a continuous. set 1993).; In addition, neural nets. from. the second: generaof possible. output values to a weighted. sum (or polytion are able to compute functions. with analog input and. . : ar : output. In fact they are universal for analog computations nomial) of the inputs. Common activation functions are . . ; . the sigmoid function oly) = 1/1 + e>) and the linear in the sense that any continuous function with a compact domain and range can be approximated arbitrarily well Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Eduardo Sontag and an (with regard to uniform convergence, ie., the L. — anonymous referee for their helpful comments. Written under partial norm) by a network of this type with a single hidden support by the Austrian Science Fund. layer. Another characteristic feature of this second Requests for reprints should be sent to W. Maass, Institute for Theeneration of neural net k models is that the ort oretical Computer Science, Technische Universitat Graz, Klosterwiesgen . 10 ne networ ° 1s : y supp gasse 32/2, A-8010, Graz, Austria; tel. +43 316 873-5822: fax: +43 316 learning algorithms that are based on gradient descent 873-5805; e-mail: maass @igi.tu-graz.ac.at such as backprop. 

1659 

1660 

W. Maass 

**==> picture [320 x 274] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
0 2000<br>Alf. yt 7<br>Avy<br>A3htTat<br>ASQ<br>ASbig get om ui a ot i a<br>AG maa tp py a a a<br>Blyge<br>Blt a<br>Bap<br>Bayne a<br>BST<br>Bot<br>CiteTE<br>C2 it a te de<br>C3 EEE<br>eee EEE...<br>CohoCSneTTa ™~—~—SY<br>Dit<br>D2pugy tp i te te Pt st a<br>1) a WT SS ONCS<br>D4)DS}eee.=>...<br>D6hLMtpttMet st |tt tSTTCSCC~S<br>BleToor<br>E3{ TL i Ct™S<br>E4{ le a ee ~~<br>OS pop tt a st—‘“CsSCSY<br>E6tapt EEF”...TT Ct™~— ]<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


FIGURE 1. Simultaneous recordings (over 4 sec) of the firing times of 30 neurons from monkey striate cortex by Kriger & Aiple (1988). Each firing is denoted by a short vertical bar, with a separate row for each neuron. For comparison we have marked the fength of an interval of 100 msec by two vertical lines. This time span is known to suffice for the completion of some complex multilayer cortical computations. 

For a biological interpretation of neural nets from the second generation one views the output of a sigmoidal unit as a representation of the current firing rate of a biological neuron. Since biological neurons, especially in higher cortical areas, are known to fire at various intermediate frequencies between their minimum and maximum frequency, neural nets from the second generation are, with regard to this ‘‘firing rate interpretation’’, biologically more realistic than models from the first generation. 

firing rate of a neuron. Thus a coding of analog variables by firing rates seems quite dubious in the context of fast cortical computations. 

On the other hand, experimental evidence has accumulated during the last few years which indicates that many biological neural systems use the timing of single action potentials (or ‘‘spikes’’) to encode information (Abeles, 1991; Abeles, Bergman, Margalit, & Vaadia, 1993; Aertsen, 1993; Arbib, 1995; Bair, Koch, Newsome, & Britten, 1994; Bialek & Rieke, 1992; Ferster & Spruston, 1995; Hopfield, 1995; Kempter, Gerstner, van Hemmen, & Wagner, 1996; Lestienne, 1996; Rieke, Warland, van Stevenick, & Bialek, 1996; Sejnowski, 1995; Singer, 1995; Softky, 1994; Thorpe & Imbert, 1989), 

However, at least with regard to fast analog computaSpruston, 1995; Hopfield, 1995; Kempter, Gerstner, van tions by networks of neurons in the cortex, the ‘‘firing Hemmen, & Wagner, 1996; Lestienne, 1996; Rieke, rate interpretation’’ itself has become questionable. PerWarland, van Stevenick, & Bialek, 1996; Sejnowski, rett, Rolls, and Caan (1982) and Thorpe and Imbert 1995; Singer, 1995; Softky, 1994; Thorpe & Imbert, (1989) have demonstrated that visual pattern analysis 1989), and pattern classification can be carried out by humans These experimental results from neurobiology have in just 100 msec, in spite of the fact that it involves a lead to the investigation of a third generation of neural minimum of 10 synaptic stages from the retina to the network models which employ spiking neurons (or temporal lobe (see Figure |.) The same speed of visual ‘‘integrate-and-fire neurons’’) as computational units. processing has been measured by Rolls and Tovee (1994) Recently, one has also started to carry out experiments in macaque monkeys. Furthermore, they have shown that with related new types of electronic hardware such as a single cortical area involved in visual processing can pulse stream VLSI (see, e.g., DeYong, Findley, & Fields, complete its computation in just 20-30 msec (Rolls, 1992; Douglas, Koch, Mahowald, Martin, & Suarez, 1994; Rolls & Tovee, 1994). On the other hand, the 1995; Horinchi, Lazzaro, Moore, & Koch, 1991; firing rates of neurons involved in these computations Jahnke, Roth, & Klar, 1996; Jiu & Leong, 1996; are usually below 100Hz, and hence at least 20~ Mahowald, 1992, 1994: Mead, 1989; Meador, Wu, 30 msec would be needed just to sample the current Cole, Nintunze, & Chintrakulchai, 1991; Murray & 

Networks of Spiking Neurons: The Third Generation of Neural Network Models 

1661 

V to the known behaviour of biological neurons we refer to Abeles (1991); Aertsen (1993); Arbib (1995); Bower and Beeman (1995); Churchland and Sejnowski (1993); Eyy(t-s) Hopfield (1995); Johnston and Wu (1995); Rieke et al. (1996); Shepherd (1990, 1994); Tuckwell (1988); and Taylor and Alavi (1993). These mathematical models t for spiking neurons do not provide a complete descrip0 s tion of the extremely complex computational function of a biological neuron. Rather, like the computational units of the previous two generations of neural network models, these are simplified models that focus on just a few aspects of biological neurons. However, in comparison with the previous two models they are substantially V more realistic. In particular, they describe much better the actual output of a biological neuron, and hence they allow us to investigate on a theoretical level the possibilities of using time as a resource for computation and communication. Whereas the timing of computation steps is usually ‘‘trivialized’’ in the models from the 0 § E,,y(t-s) t precedingsynchronization,two generationsor through (eitheran assumedthroughstochastican assumedasyn, chronicity), the timing of individual computation steps plays a key role for computations in networks of spiking FIGURE 2. Typical shape of response functions (EPSP and IPSP) neurons. In fact, the output of a spiking neuron v CONSISTS of a biological neuron. of the set F, C R” of points in time when v ‘‘fires (where R* = {x © R: x = 0}). 

Tarassenko, 1994; Northmore & Elias, 1996; Pratt, 1989; Zaghloul, Meador, & Newcomb, 1994). In these new chips one can encode analog variables by time differences between pulses, which has practical advantages over other encoding methods. The goal of understanding the capabilities and limitations of this new type of analog neural hardware provides additional motivation for theoretical investigation of the third generation of neural network models. 

One may also view threshold circuits (i.e., neural nets from the first generation) as abstract models for digital computation on networks of spiking neurons, where the bit 1 is coded by the firing of a neuron within a certain short time window, and0 by the non-firing of this neuron within this time window (see e.g., Valiant, 1994). However, under this coding scheme a threshold circuit provides a reasonably good model for a network of spiking neurons only if the firing times of all neurons that provide the input bits for another spiking neuron are synchronized (up to a few msec). Apparently such strongly synchronized activity does occur in biological neural systems (see Abeles et al., 1993; Bair et al., 1994) but many argue that it is not their typical mode of operation. Mathematical models for ‘‘integrate-and-fire neurons’’ (or “‘spiking neurons’’ as they have been called more recently) can be traced back to Lapique (1907) (see Tuckwell, 1988). There exist a number of variations of this model, which are described and compared in a recent survey (see Gerstner, 1995). With regard to the relationship of these mathematical models 

In the simplest (deterministic) model of a spiking neuron one assumes that a neuron v fires whenever its ‘potential’? P, (which models the electric membrane potential at the ‘‘trigger zone’’ of neuron v) reaches a certain threshold ©,. This potential P, is the sum of so-called excitatory postsynaptic potentials (‘‘EPSPs’’) and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (‘‘IPSPs’’), which result from the firing of other neurons wu that are connected through a “‘synapse’’ to neuron v. The firing of a “‘presynaptic’’ neuron u at time s contributes to the potential P,, at time ¢ an amount that is modelled by the term w,,,"€,,(¢ — s), which consists of a ‘‘weight’’ w,, = 0 and a response function €,,(t — s). Biologically realistic shapes of such response functions are indicated in Figure 2. The ‘‘weight’’ w,, = 0 in the term w,,-€,,(¢f — 5) reflects the ‘‘strength’’ (called ‘‘efficacy’’ in neurobiology) of the synapse between neuron u and neuron v. In the context of learning one can replace w,,, by a function w,,,(t). In addition it has been conjectured that rapid changes of the value of w,,,(¢) are also essential for computations in biological neural systems. However for simplicity we view here w,,, just as a constant. The restriction of w,,, to non-negative values is motivated by the assumption that a biological synapse is either ‘‘excitatory’’ or “‘inhibitory’’, and that it does not change its ‘‘sign’’ in the course of a “‘learning process’’. In addition, for most biological neurons u, either all response functions €,,,(¢ — s) for postsynaptic neurons v are ‘‘excitatory’’ (i.e., positive), or all of them are ““inhibitory’’ (i.e., negative). Obviously these constraints 

1662 

W. Maass 

00 | , P,(t)recentreachesfiring of© v.,(t — t’), where ft’ is the time of the most O, (t-t') For some specified subset Vinpu. GC V of input neurons ~ oo ee one assumes that the firing times (‘‘spike trains’’) F, for neurons u © Vin are not defined by the preceding cont , t vention, but are given from the outside. The firing times F,, for all other neurons v © V are determined by the FIGURE 3. Typical shape of the threshold function of a biological previously described rules, and the output of the network neuron. is given in the form of the spike trains F’, for the neurons v in a specified set of output neurons Voupa © V. have basically no impact on theoretical complexity Experiments have shown that in vitro biological investigations (just consider pairs of excitatory and inhineurons fire with slightly varying delays in response to bitory neurons instead of single neurons), unless one repetitions of the same current injection (Aertsen, 1993). cares about small constant factors in the size of networks, Only under certain conditions neurons are known to fire or one wants to model the actual architecture of cortical in a more reliable manner (Mainen & Sejnowski, 1995). circuits (see Douglas et al., 1995; Shepherd, 1990). Therefore one also considers the stochastic or noisy It is mathematically more convenient to assume that version of the SNN model (Maass, 1996b), where the the potential P, has value 0 in the absence of postsyndifference P(t) — ©,(t — t’) just governs the probability aptic potentials, and that the threshold value ©, is always that neuronv fires at time t. The choice of the exact firing > 0. In a ‘‘typical’’ biological neuron the resting memtimes is left up to some unknown stochastic processes, brane potential is around —70 mV, the firing threshold of and it may for example occur that v does not fire in a time a ‘‘rested’’ neuron is around —50 mV, and a postsynaptic interval J during which P,(t) — @,(t — t') > 0, or that v potential (i.e., EPSP or IPSP) changes the membrane fires spontaneously at a timet when P,(t) — @,(t— t') <0. potential temporarily by at most a few mV. The previously described noisy version of the SNN If a neuron vhas fired at time f¢’, it will not fire again model is basically identical with the spike response for a few msec after t’, no matter how large its current model in Gerstner (1995) (see also Gerstner & van potential P,(r) is (‘absolute refractory period’’). Then Hemmen, 1994), and with the other common mathefor a few further msec it is still ‘‘reluctant’’ to fire, i.e., a matical models for networks of spiking neurons (see, firing requires a larger value of P,(t) than usual (*‘relae.g., Abeles et al., 1993; Arbib, 1995; Tuckwell, 1988). tive refractory period’’). Both of these refractory effects Subtle differences exist between these models with are modelled by a suitable ‘‘threshold function” © (t— 1’), regard to their treatment of the refractory effects and where ?’ is the time of the most recent firing of v. In the the ‘‘reset’’ of the membrane potential after a firing. deterministic (i.e., noise-free) version of the spiking But these differences will be irrelevant for the results neuron model one assumes that v fires whenever P,(f) that are considered in this article. crosses from below the function @,(¢ — ¢’). A typical For theoretical results about stable states, synfire shape of the function ©,(¢ — r’) for a biological neuron chains, associative memory, etc. in networks of spiking is indicated in Figure 3. We assume that @,(¢ — 1’) = neurons we refer to Abeles (1991); Aityuan and Barrow © (0) for large values of t — t’. We will consider in this (1993); Bienenstock (1995); Crair and Bialek (1990); article only computations in models for networks of spikGerstner (1991); Gerstner and van Hemmen (1994); ing neurons where can assume that each neuronv did not Gerstner, Ritz, and van Hemmen (1993); Herrmann, fire for a while (i.e., t — t’ is large); hence, its threshold Hertz, and Priigel-Bennett (in press); Hopfield and function has returned to its ‘‘resting value’? ©,(0). Herz (1995); Ritz, Gerstner, Fuentes, and van Hemmen Therefore, the shape of ©, is not relevant for these argu(1994). Results about computations with stochastic ments, provided that @,(x)= © ,(0) for sufficiently large x. spiking neurons in firing rate coding can be found in A formal Spiking Neuron Network (SNN)—which Koch and Poggio (1992); Shawe-Taylor, Jeavons, and was introduced in Maass (1995b, 1996a)—\ consists of a Van Daalen (1991), and results about the information finite set V of spiking neurons, a set E C V X V of transmitted by spiking neurons in Stevens and Zador synapses, a weight w,, = QO and a response function (1996). Computations with a somewhat different model €,:R* — R for each synapse < u,v > © E (where of a stochastic spiking neuron are studied in Judd and R*: = {x © R:x = 0}), and a threshold function ©: Aihara (1993) (see also the discussion in Maass, 1996a; R* — R® for each neuron v & V. Shawe-Taylor et al., 1991; Zhao, 1995). The possible use If F,, C R® is the set offiring times of a neuron u, then of phases of periodically firing neurons for the dynamic the potential at the trigger zone of neuron v at time t is binding of variables is investigated in Shastri and given by Ajjanagadde (1993). a Put): = Dic<ur>ee 25ers bu oT ~ 8). real-valuedWe use in thisinterchangeablyarticle the termsto denoteanalog, numericalvariables andthat In a noise-free mode] a neuronv fires at time ¢ as soon as range over R or an interval of R. For simplicity we 

Networks of Spiking Neurons: The Third Generation of Neural Network Models 

1663 

assume that all neural nets from the first two generations that are considered in the following have a feedforward architecture. 

Only if one wants to respect in A’ the biologically motivated constraint that each neuron in XX’ should only trigger EPSPs, or only IPSPs, then each gate of W has to be simulated by a pair consisting of an excitatory and an inhibitory spiking neuron that both get the same input. In N’ one need not make use of the possibility to assign different values to the delays A,,, of a neuron v (which model the time that passes until a firing of u has an effect on P,(t); see Figure 4) for different neurons u with <uv > € E. Fora biological neuron, these delays A,,» may very well be different, depending on the length of the axon of wu and the distance from the synapse to the trigger zone of v, but also on the distribution of ion channels in the dendritic tree of v. In fact, it is frequently assumed that the delays A,, = A,,(t) are parameters that are tuned by some learning algorithm in biological neural systems (see, e.g., Kempter et al., 1996). Recent theoretical results (Maass & Schmitt, 1997) indicate that the expressive power of a neuron of type A with n variable delays is larger than that of a neuron of type A with n variable weights: its VC-dimension is @(n log n) in the former case, but only @(n) in the latter case. 

2. SIMULATION AND SEPARATION RESULTS The mathematically simplest one within the range of SNN models is the one where the firing is deterministic, and both the response functions and the threshold functions are piecewise constant (i.e., ‘‘step functions’’) as indicated in Figure 4. In the following we refer to this version as type A. This version of the SNN model actually captures quite well the intended capabilities of artificial spiking neurons in pulse stream VLSI. 

We will later also discuss SNN models of type B, where we assume that response and threshold functions are continuous and piecewise linear. Examples for the simplest non-trivial response functions of type B are indicated in Figure 5. By using four or five linear segments one can approximate quite well the response and threshold functions of biological neurons with continuous piecewise linear functions (and hence with spiking neurons of type B). 

spiking neurons of type B). If one makes use of the possibility to employ for certain neurons v different delays A,,, for different 2.1. Computation of Boolean Functions neurons u, then one can show that an SNN of type A is in fact computationally more powerful than neural nets of We first observe that for the case of boolean input this the same or similar size from the first or second model is computationally at least as powerful as neural genration. For that purpose we consider the concrete nets from the first generation. We assume thatn input bits boolean function CD,: {0, 1}°*” — {0,1}, which is X\,...X, are given to the SNN via n input neurons defined by @},...,2,, where a; fires at a specific time Tinpy if x; = 1, . and a; does not fire at all if x; = 0. We assume that the 1, ifxj=y=l ofoutputa specifiedbit of theoutputSNNneuronis givenduringby thesomefiringspecifiedor non-firingtime CD,X1) 0069Xns Vio eo Y= for some. i € {1,...,7} window. One can then simulate any layered feedforward 0, otherwise. neural net N from the first generation by an SNN A’ of type A which has basically the same architecture as WN. This function appears to be relevant in a biological context, since it formalizes some form of pattern-matching, respectively, coincidence-detection. V A single spiking neuron v of type A (or of any other “‘reasonable’’ type) can compute CD,. One just has to Ey,u(t-5) choose the delays to v from the input nodes ay,...,a,, (for —_ X1,...,X,) and the input nodes b,,...,b, (for y1,...,¥,) in such a way that A,,, =A,,, fori=1,...n, and A,, is so s stAgy t much larger than A,, , for j > i that the non-zero parts of , the response functions Eq, and Eq,,y do not overlap if a; and a; fire simultaneously. All weights can be chosen equal to 1. On the side, we would like to point out that a single ° spiking neuron of type A (or of type B) can compute this function CD, in a noise-robust fashion, where small G(r’) deviations in the firing times of the input neurons Tot O_O @},...;@,, in the delays from these input neurons, in the TS weights or in the firing threshold do not affect the r correctness of the output. To achieve this, it suffices to FIGURE 4. Response and threshold functions of a spiking neuassign to the firing threshold © ,(0) of the spiking neuron ron of type A. a value such as 1.5-(maximal value of an EPSP). 

1664 

W. Maass 

THEOREM 1. 1. Any threshold circuitN that computes CD,, classes—to the next node in N (with regard to the has at least n/log(n + 1) gates. linear order < ). 2. Any sigmoidal neural net N with piecewise polyIf one starts this construction with Q@ = {0,1!}” for the nomial activation functions that computes CD, has first computation node in WN, after the k'" node one gets a Q(n") gates. For the case ofpiecewise exponential actipartition of Q into at most (7 + 1)* equivalence classes. vation functions (such as 0) one gets a lower bound of On the other hand the fact that Afcomputes CD,, implies an"). that the output node of Ai computes for each assignment to b,,..., b, a different function from S into {0,1}, i-e., it Proof. Let a4,..., An, b1,..., by be the input nodes of N partitions {0,1}”" into 2” different equivalence classes Q. where it receives the values x1,..., Xn, Yq...) Vn Of its 2n Hence, the number s of computation nodes in N that have input variables. We show in fact a slightly stronger result a direct edge from at least one of the input nodes b),..., 5, than claimed: The lower bounds hold already for the satisfies (n + 1)° = 2", ie, 5 = nilog(n + 1). numbers of those gates in N that have a direct edge In the proof of Part 2 we construct from Xa related from at least one of the input nodes b,,..., b,. Thus in sigmoidal neural net A’ for which we can show that it has the case of layered neural nets these are lower bounds for “‘high’’ VC-dimension, and hence must contain a subthe number of gates on the first hidden layer. stantial number of sigmoidal gates. Such proof structure We consider computations of A( where where some ‘‘fixed’’ was first used by Koiran (1996), in a somewhat different vector g € g € € {0,1}" is assigned to the the input nodes nodes b),..., b,,, context. 

We consider computations of A( where where some ‘‘fixed’’ vector g € g € € {0,1}" is assigned to the the input nodes nodes b),..., b,,, so that the output of N may be viewed as a function of the assignments to the input nodes a,..., a@,. We only consider the setS of those n assignments €1,...,€,, € {0,1}” to j,...,4@, Where exactly one of the n input variables has the value 1. Since NM computes CD,, it is obvious that for the 2" different choices of g € {0,1}” the network computes 2” different functions from S$ into {0,1}. 

If one considers just a),..., a, as input nodes of N, then different fixed assignments to b,,..., b, can only shift the threshold of those s computation nodes in W that have direct edges from bj,..., b,. We now consider a variation N' of N where the input nodes b,,..., b, are deleted, and the thresholds of the abovementioned s gates in N are viewed as the only ‘‘programmable parameters’’ (or “‘weights’”) in the usual sense of VC-dimension theory for neural networks (for a brief survey see Maass (1995a)). The fact that A{ computes CD,, implies that N’ shatters S (with regard to different assignments to these s programmable parameters). Thus, 4/’ has a VCdimension of at least n. On the other hand, the results of Goldberg & Jerrum (1995) and Karpinski & Macintyre (in press) imply that in this case the number s of programmable parameters in WV satisfies n = O(s*) in the case of piecewise polynomial activation functions, respectively n = O(s*) in the case of piecewise exponential activation functions. 

For the proof of Part / we fix a linear order < on the computation nodes in Aso that each computation node g receives (apart from input nodes aj,..., ad, and Dj,..., b,) only edges from other computation nodes in N that precede g in this linear order. Consider some arbitrary computation node g in WN, and a set Q of assignments g © {0,1}"to by,..., b, so that every computation node before g computes a function from S into {0,1} (with regard to assignments of inputs from S$ to the input nodes aj,..., a,), which is the same for each of the assignments g © Q to b,,..., b». Note that for the first computation node in N we can set Q: = {0,1}”. 

Then for assignments from S to aj,..., a,, the values received by gate g from other computation nodes do not 2.2. Computation of Functions with Analog Input and depend on the chosen assignment q © Qto dj,..., Dy. Boolean Output Hence, the weighted sum of the values received by g via direct edges from the input nodes ay,..., a), and from We have have already shown that for boolean inpua for boolean inpua boolean inpua inpuaa ne **t** workss computation nodes that precede g in < , assumes at of spiking neurons of type A has the full computational most n different values r; = ... = r, for the n different power of a a neural net from the first generation of similar assignments from S to dj,..., a, and arbitrary assignsize, and is in fact more powerful. However, neural nets ments from Q to b,,..., b,. Obviously the output of g from all three generations are also able to process numerdepends only on the value of this weighted sum and on ical inputs from R” or [0,1]", instead of just boolean the weighted sum r of those values that g receives via inputs from {0,1}”. For networks of spiking neurons it direct edges from input nodes bj,..., b,. If @ is the is natural to encode a numerical numerical input variable x; © R by threshold of the threshold gate g, then the minimal i the firing time Tig. — x;c of input neuron a; (see also such that r;-+ r = © can assume at most n + 1 different Hopfield, 1995), where c > 0 is some constant and Tippy values (including the value i = n+ Lifr, +r < @). is a parameter that depends on the time when the input Consequently, with different fixed assignments of g € Q arrives, but not on the values of the input variables x;. to b,,..., b, the node g can compute at most n + 1 difSimilarly one expects that a numerical output y € R R is ferent functions from S into {0,1}. This yields a partition realized in an SNN by the firing of a certain ‘‘output of Q into n + 1 equivalence classes, and one can apply neuron’’ at time Tou — ye where Toupu > Tinpu 1S the same argument—for each of these equivalence independent from the values x),..., x, of the input 

We have have already shown that for boolean inpua for boolean inpua boolean inpua inpuaa ne **t** workss of spiking neurons of type A has the full computational power of a a neural net from the first generation of similar size, and is in fact more powerful. However, neural nets from all three generations are also able to process numerical inputs from R” or [0,1]", instead of just boolean inputs from {0,1}”. For networks of spiking neurons it is natural to encode a numerical numerical input variable x; © R by the firing time Tig. — x;c of input neuron a; (see also Hopfield, 1995), where c > 0 is some constant and Tippy is a parameter that depends on the time when the input arrives, but not on the values of the input variables x;. Similarly one expects that a numerical output y € R R is realized in an SNN by the firing of a certain ‘‘output neuron’’ at time Tou — ye where Toupu > Tinpu 1S independent from the values x),..., x, of the input 

Networks of Spiking Neurons: The Third Generation of Neural Network Models 

1665 

variables. We will refer to this method of encoding this consideration one has to allow polytopes that are analog variables by the timing of single spikes as intersections of closed and open halfspaces. “‘linear temporal coding’’. For the computation of funcWenowconsiderthosen! inputsx,= <7(1),-- mr€E tions with boolean output one can either employ the same {l,..., m}" that represent all n! permutations 7 of output convention as before, or apply rounding (i.e., one {1,..., a}. It suffices to show that each x, lies in a difconsiders a firing of the output neuron before a certain ferent polytope, since this implies that 2‘ = n!. Thus fixed time 7 as an output of “‘/’’). assume for a contradiction that two permutations x, A concrete example for an interesting function with and x, lie in the same polytope P. By construction the analog input and boolean output is the ‘‘element distinctthreshold circuit N gives the same output for all x € P. ness function’ ED, : (R*)" = {0,1} defined by Since P is convex, N gives not only the same output for ED, (X), -.+5Xy) xX, and xz, but also for all points on the line L that connects these two points. This yields a contradiction, since l, if x; =x, for some i # j ED,(X,) = ED,(x;) = 0, but ED,(x) = | for some point x = 4 9, if; Ix; — xj] = 1 for all i,jCo with i 4 j onInthisorderline toL. analyse the complexity of functions with arbitrary, otherwise. boolean output on sigmoidal neural nets, one needs to fix a suitable convention for rounding the real-valued output If one encodes the value of input variable x; as the firing of such nets. In order to make our subsequent lower time Tin — x;¢ (of input neuron a,), then for suffibound result as strong as possible, one may assume ciently large values of the constant c > 0 a single here the weakest possible rounding convention, where spiking neuron v can compute ED, (even with Aa,v = for some arbitrary parameter © the real-valued output r Aa,v for all ij © {1,....2}). This holds for any reasonof the output node of the net is rounded to 1 if r= ©. No able type of response function, e.g., type A, or the type B separating interval is required between outputs that are considered below. rounded to 0 respectively 1. 

We also would like to point out that ED, can be comIn the same way as for CD, one can show that any puted by a single spiking neuron in a very noise-robust neural net from the second generation that computes ED, fashion. Let& ma, be the maximal value thatis assumed by needs to have O(n "ay gates. This lower bound will be an EPSP, and let e(c) be the maximal value that can be improved to (n — 1)/4 in the following theorem. The achieved by the sum of two EPSPs that arrive with a proof of this stronger separation result exploits, instead temporal difference of at least c. By choosing the value of a bound for the VC-dimension, Sontag’s better upper 0,(0) = Fos) for the firing threshold of a ‘‘rested’’ bound of 2w + 1 (Sontag, 1997) for the maximal number neuron v one achieves that v definitely fires if x; = x; for d such that every set of d different inputs in general somei # j, and that it does definitely not fire if lx; — x;! = 1 position can be shattered by a sigmoidal neural net for any two different inputs x; x; given in temporal with w programmable parameters. In order to apply his coding. In addition with this choice of ©,(0) the result in our lower bound argument one has to construct neuron v gives the correct output even if its membrane from an arbitrary sigmoidal neural net which computes potential, its firing threshold, and the arrival times of its ED,, a related net that shatters every set of n — 1 inputs. input-EPSPs are subject to noise. Furthermore, its ‘‘safety margin’ of 28 0) can be increased up to THEOREM 3. Any sigmoidal neural net N that computes the value Finan if c is chosen so large that e(c) = & max. ED, has at least 14 — 1 hidden units. This noise-robust computation of ED, by a spiking neuron is made possible through the way in which this Proof. Let N be an arbitrary sigmoidal neural net with k function ED, is defined: if min{lx; — x,l: i # j} has a gates that computes ED,,. value betweenO and | for some input <x;,...,x, > ER", Consider any set S C R* of size n — 1. Let} > 0 be then it does not matter whether the neuron fires or not. sufficiently large so that the numbers in A-S have pairThus, the clause ‘‘arbitrary’’ in the definition of ED, wise distance = 2. LetA be a set of nm — | numbers > makes sure that ‘“‘hair-trigger situations’? can be avoided max(A-S) + 2 with pairwise distance = 2. by a spiking neuron that computes ED,,. By assumption A can decide for n arbitrary inputs from \-S U A whether they are all different. Let 4j, be THEOREM 2, Any layered threshold circuit N that coma variation of XM where all weights on edges from the first putes ED, has Q(n-log n) gates on its first hidden layer. input variable are multiplied by \. Then by assigning suitable fixed sets of » — 1 pairwise different numbers Proof. Let k be the number of gates in WX on the first from \.S U A to the other n — 1 input variables, N hidden layer. The corresponding & halfspaces partition computes any characteristic function over S. the input space R” into at most 2* different polytopes Thus, if one considers as programmable parameters of (i.e., intersections of halfspaces) so that N gives the N the = k weights on edges from the first input variable same output for all inputs from the same polytope. For of Nand the = k[thresholds][of][ gates][that][are][connected][to] 

1666 

W. Maass 

some of the other x — | input variable, then Xi shatters S way to the trigger zone. Hence, such isolated EPSPs have with 2k programmable parameters. Actually in the more hardly any impact on the membrane potential P,(f) at the general setting of the subsequent argument we have only trigger zone. On the other hand, EPSPs that arrive synk + 1 programmable parameters, since the k occurrences chrononsly at adjacent synapses are ‘‘boosted’’ at “‘hot of the factor \ in the weights may be counted as a single spots’’ of the dendritic tree, and hence may have a sigprogrammable parameter. nificant impact on the membrane potential P,(t)at the Since the set § C R®* of size n — | was chosen trigger zone (Shepherd, 1994). We have defined ED, in arbitrarily, we can now apply the result from Sontag such a way that, in spite of these nonlinear effects in the (1997), which implies that n - 1 = 2(k + 1) + 1, integration of EPSPs,it is quite plausible that a biological hence k = (n — 4)/2. Thus, N has at least (n — 4)/2 neuron can compute ED,, in temporal coding for a fairly computation nodes, and therefore at least (n — 4)/2 — | large value of n. A neuron computing ED,, needs to fire hidden units. only when two ‘“‘blocks’’ consisting of three adjacent synapses all receive synchronous EPSPs. Furthermore, Remark 4. a “‘hair-trigger’’ situation is avoided, since no require1. The lower bound of Qn) in Theorem 3 is the largest ments are macede forTor thethe casecase wienwhen th Me neuron receivesives lower bound for the size. of sigmoidal. . neural nets that just four or fiveeesynchronous. (or almost. synchronous) has ; . . EPSPs. Non-firing is required only in the case when the so far been achieved (not just for ED,, but for any . . . concrete function).. The best previously. known lower neuron. receives. at most three EPSPs during any time bound was Qn'") Wapfor some other function,, due to interval of length c. Koiran (1996) : In order to prove a lower bound for the number of 2. The result of Section 4 in Sontag (1997) implies. that hiddmcoen Vansits in1 abiitrary neural nets NXX. thatth compute . ED,, with sigmoidal and threshold gates, one proceeds his upper bound, and hence the lower bound of the ! . . . . 7s - as in the proof of Theorem 3. One now considers arbipreceding Theorem 3, remain valid if the neural netN. op . . . ; trary sets S C R™ of size [(n — 3)/3] and divides the computing ED, employs both sigmoidal gates and a . . . threshold gates. remaining # .— 3 input variables; into; |(n — 3)/3] blocks. of three variables that always receive the same input Apparently for most neurons vy in the cortex it is not value. Let ‘NY be a variation of N which identifies the likely that the *‘weights’” w,,, of its synapses are large first three input variables, and multiplies all their weights enough such that just two synchronous EPSPs suffice to by a common factor X. Since A computes DE,,, the netincrease the potential P,. over the firing threshold © ,(0) work Xj with k computation nodes shatters S with the of a ‘‘rested’’ neuron y. In that regard the common mathhelp of k + 1 programmable parameters. Hence, Sontag’s ematical model for a spiking neuron ‘‘overestimates’’ the result (Sontag, 1997) yields |(n — 3)/3] = 24k +1) +1, computational capabilities of a biological neuron, It is Le. k = (n — 15)/6. more realistic to assume that six simultaneously arriving If one plugs in a common estimate for the number n of EPSPs can cause a neuron to fire (see the discussion in synapses at a biological neuron, such as n = 10000, the Valiant, 1994). Therefore, we consider the following preceding inequality yields a lower bound of 1663 for the variation ED, : (R* y" — 0, | of the function ED, number k — 1 of hidden units in XN. Hence, even if one ~ prefers to plug in somewhat different values for some of ED,.(%),.+-Xn) the abovementioned constants, the preceding proof for I, ; ; ED,, (respectively, for a variation of ED,, that reflects if there exists some k = I such that different choices of the parameters involved) still Xy5X9,X35X3p 415 %3K 42X34 43 all have yields a lower bound of several hundreds for the minimal he s: al size of a sigmoidal neural net which computes the same the same value function. Thus we have demonstrated a substantial dif1 => 0, if. every intervalf 1 CR” + of length | ferenceneurons betweenand sigmoidalthe computational‘‘neurons’’ power(i.e., computationalof biological contains the values of at most units from the second generation). 3; ‘ables For numerical inputs our previously sketched simula? Input variables x; tion of threshold circuits (i.e., neural nets from the first arbitrary, otherwise. generation) by a network of spiking neurons of type A fails. More surprisingly, one can prove that no such simuIn the common model of a spiking neuron the membrane lation is possible. Letfi N — N be any function. Then for potential P,(t) is assumed to be a linear sum of the postnumerical inputs there exists no way of simulating an synaptic potentials. This is certainly an idealization, arbitrary threshold circuit with s gates by a network of since isolated EPSPs that arrive at synapses far away f(s) spiking neurons of type A. Consider a threshold from the trigger zone (which is located at the beginning circuit that outputs | for inputs x,, x2, x3 © [0, 1] of the axon) are subject to an exponential decay on their if x; + x. = x3, and 0 else. Obviously this can be 

Networks of Spiking Neurons: The Third Generation of Neural Network Models 

1667 

achieved by a circuit with just three threshold gates: the V circuit outputs | if (x; + x. S x3 AND x; + x2 = x3). However, it has been shown that this function from [0, 1]° into {0, 1} (as well as any restriction to [0,y]° for Eyv (t-s) some y > 0) cannot be computed by any network of spiking neurons of type A, no matter how many neurons and how much computation time it employs. This folS stAuy f lows from a general characterization of the computational power of networks of spiking neurons of type A for numerical inputs in terms of the computational power of a restriction called N = RAM of the common model of V a random access machine (RAM) that is given in Maass & Ruf (1995). Thus, we have arrived here at a limit of the computastAny tional power of spiking neurons of type A for numerical inputs. The question arises whether this limitation indis t cates a weakness of spiking neurons in general, or just a Env (t-s) weakness of the extremely simple response and threshold functions of type A. For answering this question let us FIGURE 5. Response functions (EPSP and IPSP) of a spiking . aoe . . . . neuron of type B. The particular shape of the ‘triangle’ is not consider spiking neurons with continuous piecewise : Be gs . . ' . important for results in this article. linear (instead of piecewise constant) response and threshold functions, to which we refer as spiking neurons of type B. Examples for the simplest non-trivial response in temporal coding (in response to analog inputs x, x, given functions for the type A spiking neuron are indicated in in temporal coding). Figure 5. Equation (1) reveals the somewhat surprising fact that, 

in temporal coding (in response to analog inputs x, x, given in temporal coding). 

Equation (1) reveals the somewhat surprising fact that, in the context of temporal coding, the ‘‘weights’’ w,,, of synapses of spiking neurons are able to play the same role as those of computational units of the first two generations of neural network. 

With regard to the computational power of spiking neurons of type B it does not make much difference whether one allows here piecewise constant, piecewise linear, or more general types of threshold functions 0,, as long as we consider only feedforward computations and the threshold functions ©, have the value ‘‘co’’ for small arguments. In addition the, concrete shape of the response functions of type B will be irrelevant in the following. 

as long as we consider only feedforward computations All subsequent layers after the first hidden layer in a and the threshold functions ©, have the value ‘‘co’’ for layered neural net from the first generation receive just small arguments. In addition the, concrete shape of the boolean inputs, even if the network inputs are realresponse functions of type B will be irrelevant in the valued. Hence, these subsequent layers can easily be following. simulated by spiking neurons of type A (as indicated One can show that in contrast to the abovementioned before). However, a subtle but serious problem arises if negative result about neural! nets of type A, a network of one wants to simulate threshold circuits with boolean O(1) spiking neurons with response functions of type B inputs and outputs (or any other type of boolean circuit) (e.g., as indicated in Figure 5) can simulate any threshold with spiking neurons of type B, e.g., with response funcgate even for # real-valued input variables. This simulations as in Figure 5, which are substantially closer to the tion exploits an important effect of spiking neurons of biological prototypes in Figure 2 than response functions type B that cannot be realized with spiking neurons of of type A. It is obvious that a spiking neuron of type B type A: incoming EPSPs and IPSPs can shift the firing can simulate a boolean gate only if it receives synchrotime of a neuron in a continuous manner (Maass, 1997). nized input spikes. The problem is that even if a layer of More precisely, for a certain range of the parameters spiking neurons of type B receives boolean input via involved, the firing time f, of a neuron v in response to synchronized input spikes (e.g., in a coding where a the firings of presynaptic neurons u at times Tippy — XC spike corresponds to ‘‘1’’ and no spike corresponds to can be written in the form “*Q’°), the neurons on this layer will not fire in a synchronized manner, but at slightly different times that depend ty = Toutpur — > SIZN(Ey, »)-Wy,v'Xu (1) on their concrete input ‘‘bits’’. The root of this problem wu YEE (which does not arise for spiking neurons of type A) is where Tou does not depend on the values of the x,, and the fact that a potential P,(f) that is the sum of several where sign(e,,) = —1 in the case of an EPSP and EPSPs and IPSPs of type B will itself be continuous and sign(€,,) = —1 in the case of an IPSP. Thus, neuron y piecewise linear, and that the slopes of its linear. pieces outputs the weighted sum will depend in particular on the number of EPSPs that it > sign(€y y)-Wu,v Xn receiv“‘bool **e** an’’s s **i** mulnpu **t** anein **ou** slyr interpr(h **e** tation).nce onThus,the theconcretprecis **e** wu VEE time when P,(t) crosses the threshold @,(0) will in 

1668 

W. Maass 

general depend on the ‘‘boolean’’ input of the spiking question arises whether networks of spiking neurons of neuron. This causes a serious problem for the simulation type B can also simulate (respectively approximate) of multilayer threshold circuits (or other multilayer neural nets from the second generation which have boolean circuits) by SNNs of type B, because if those real-valued input and output. This question is answered neurons v on the considered layer that are firing (and affirmatively in Maass (1997), by showing that, with hence represent a ‘‘l’’ in the simulation of a boolean regard to temporal coding of real-valued variables +, circuit) do not fire in a synchronized manner, the simulaany continuous function F: [0, 1]" — [0, 1‘ can be tion of threshold gates, or even of simpler boolean gates approximated arbitrary closely (with regard to uniform (such as AND), by the next layer of spiking neurons of convergence, i.e., L.,) by a one hidden layer network of type B becomes impossible. spiking neurons of type B. In fact, this result holds not just just for the simple scheme THEOREM 5. Any threshold circuit of s s gates having realof linear temporal coding described at the beginning of valued inputs from [0, 1]" can be simulated bya byaa network Section 2.2, but also for any other scheme of coding of O(s) O(s) spiking neurons of type type B. analog variables by the timing of single spikes that is 

In fact, this result holds not just just for the simple scheme THEOREM 5. Any threshold circuit of s s gates having realof linear temporal coding described at the beginning of valued inputs from [0, 1]" can be simulated bya byaa network Section 2.2, but also for any other scheme of coding of O(s) O(s) spiking neurons of type type B. analog variables by the timing of single spikes that is “‘continuously related’’ to this scheme. Thus for Proof. Consider first an arbitrary threshold gate G example, it also holds if a neuron that fires at time with inputs < x,,....x, > from [0, 1]" that outputs 1 if T — x-c does not encode the analog number x, but instead 3") ax; 2 a, and 0 otherwise. We show that G can be e“orx, simulated by a network having a constant number (i.e., In addition there exists evidence that many practically O(1)) of spiking neurons of type B with regard to temporal relevant analog function F can be approximated by small coding of network inputs x,,...,x, (for a sufficiently small networks of spiking neurons of type B. A large number of value of the constant c). One employs here the same conresults regarding practical applications of learning with struction as for the simulation of a linear (respectively backprop on sigmoidal neural nets suggest that the sigmoidal) gate given in Maass (1997), which yields a relevant target functions F for these applications can be spiking neuron v whose firing time represents the learned (and hence approximated) by sigmoidal neural weighted sum >//_ ; a,x; in temporal coding. In particular nets with a rather small number of sigmoidal gates. Addiv fires at or before a fixed time T (which does not depend tional empirical evidence suggests that the precise form ON X),...X,) if >7_| wx; Z ao, and after time 7' otherwise. of the sigmoidal activation function is not important for We arrange that the resulting EPSP from v arrives at a the number of sigmoidal gates that are needed. Thus one subsequent spiking neuron v’, which receives in addition can argue that the target functions F: [0, 1]" > [0, 1]* that an EPSP from an auxiliary spiking neuron whose firing arise in application problems can in general be approxitime depends On Tinpy, but not on x),...,%,. With a suitable mated quite well by sigmoidal neural nets with a small choice of weights and delays for v’, the neuron will fire if number s of sigmoidal units that employ the following and only if v fires at or before time T. linear saturated activation function w: Obviously one can simulate in the same way the whole 0. ify first layer of any given. threshold circuitoo, C. In order to . ify<O. of type B, one can employ the construction from Maass 1 ify simulate the subsequent layers of C with spiking neurons Ty)= | y, fOsy=l1 (1996a). The previously. described: spikingvy neurons v’ » ify>.. represent the outputs of gates from the first layer of C The approximation result of Leshno, Lin, Pinkus, and by firing if and only if the corresponding gate in C outSchocken (1993) implies that in this case F can also be puts 1. However, the precise time at which v’ fires in this approximated quite well by a network of O(s) spiking case depends on x),...,x,,. Hence, before one can use the, neurons of type B. ‘“‘boolean’’ outputs of these gates v’ as inputs for other Thus, one may say that with regard to circuit complexspiking neurons of type B to simulate the subsequent ity for computing analog functions, networks of spiking layers of C according to the construction in Maass neurons of type B are at least as powerful as neural nets (1996a), one has to employ a synchronization module from the second generation. Furthermore, our previously as constructed in the proof of Theorem 2.1! in Maass described /ower bounds for the size of neural nets from (1996a). the first two generations (for nets that compute the functions CD,, ED, or ED,,) imply that networks of spiking 2.3. Further Results for Networks of Spiking Neurons neurons of type B are in fact strictly more Powerful than f Type B neural nets from the first two generations: in order to onetyP achieve separation results between SNNs of type B and We have shown in the preceding section that in contrast neural nets from the first two generations it just remains to SNNs of type A, networks of spiking neurons of type B to verify that instead of a single spiking neuron of type A can simulate neural nets from the first generation even for also a single spiking neuron of type B can compute CD,,, the case of real-valued network input. Hence, the ED, and ED,,. 

Networks of Spiking Neurons: The Third Generation of Neural Network Models 

1669 

We refer to Maass (1996a, 1997) for details of the research topic. In fact it has a long tradition in theoretical proofs of the abovementioned simulation results. It can neurobiology, biophysics, and theoretical physics. Howbe seen from these proofs that—for positive results about ever, a mathematically rigorous analysis of the computathe computational power of SNNs of type B—they do tional power of networks of spiking neurons has so far not actually require that the response or threshold funcbeen missing. We believe that such analysis will be helptions are piecewise linear (i.e., of type B). Rather it ful in understanding the organization of computations in suffices to assume that EPSPs have some small linearly complex biological neural systems. increasing segment and IPSPs have some small linearly In addition such analysis appears to be helpful for decreasing segment. These properties are approximately evaluating the potential capabilities of various designs satisfied by EPSPs and IPSPs of biological neurons (see of ‘‘artificial networks of spiking neurons’’, in particular Figure 2). In Maass (1995a, c) a complete characterizaof silicon implementations of integrated circuits that tion of the computational power of SNNs of type B is compute with pulses (DeYong et al., 1992; Douglas given in terms of a restriction (called N-RAM) of the et al., 1995; Horinchi et al., 1991; Jahnke et al., 1996; familiar model of a random access machine. Jiu & Leong, 1996; Mahowald, 1994; Mead, 1989; In addition it is shown in Maass (1997) that the simuMeador et al., 1991; Murray & & Tarassenko, 1994; Northlation of sigmoidal neural nets by SNNs can also be more & Elias, 1996; Pratt, 1989; Zaghloul et al., 1994; carried out with the biologically more realistic model Zhao, 1995). For example, the results of this article and of a stochastic or noisy spiking neuron. It is easy to see those in Maass and Ruf (1995) show that there exist that the functions CD,, ED,, and ED,, considered here, drastic differences between the computational capabilcan be computed bya computed bya byaa single noisy noisy spiking neuron neuron of type type ities of networks of spiking neurons that operate with A or B. Furthermore, it is shown in Maass (1996b) that rectangular pulses (i.e., type A) and those that operate even with very noisy spiking neurons of type A or B B one with triangular pulses (i.e., type B). 

In addition it is shown in Maass (1997) that the simuMeador et al., 1991; Murray & & Tarassenko, 1994; Northlation of sigmoidal neural nets by SNNs can also be more & Elias, 1996; Pratt, 1989; Zaghloul et al., 1994; carried out with the biologically more realistic model Zhao, 1995). For example, the results of this article and of a stochastic or noisy spiking neuron. It is easy to see those in Maass and Ruf (1995) show that there exist that the functions CD,, ED,, and ED,, considered here, drastic differences between the computational capabilcan be computed bya computed bya byaa single noisy noisy spiking neuron neuron of type type ities of networks of spiking neurons that operate with A or B. Furthermore, it is shown in Maass (1996b) that rectangular pulses (i.e., type A) and those that operate even with very noisy spiking neurons of type A or B B one with triangular pulses (i.e., type B). can in principle carry out arbitrary digital computations with any desired degree of reliability. However, noise certainly affects the computational power of networks REFERENCES of spiking neurons for analog input, and we refer to Maass and Orponen (1997) with regard to limits of the Abeles, M. (1991). Corticonics; Neural circuits of the cerebral cortex. computational power of networks. of noisy spiking Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. neurons with analog input. Abeles, M., Bergman, H., Margalit, E., & Vaadia, E. (1993). Spatiotemporal firing patterns in the frontal cortex of behaving monkeys. Journal of Neurophilosiology, 70, 1629-1638. 3. CONCLUSIONS Aertsen, A. (Ed.) (1993). Brain theory: spatio-temporal aspects of brain function. Elsevier. We have analysed in this article the computational power Aityan, S. K.,& Barrow, D. L. (1993). Paradigm, logical performance, of networks of spiking neurons with regard, to temporal and training of recurrent refractory neural networks. Neural, ; . . : . Parallel & Scientific Computations, 1, 3-28. coding with single spikes. It turns out that this computaArbib, M. A. (1995). The handbook of brain theory and neural nettional model has at least the same computational power works, Cambridge: MIT Press. as neural nets from the first two generations (i.e., multiBair, W., Koch, C., Newsome, W., & Britten, K. (1994). Reliable layer perceptions and sigmoidal neural nets) of a similar temporal modulation in cortical spike trains in the awake monkey. size. Furthermore we have exhibited concrete functions In Proceedings i momposium on Dynamics of Neural Prowhich require for their computation significantly fewer Bialek. W. & Rieke, F. (1992), Reliability and information transmisneurons in a network of spiking neurons. sion in spiking neurons. Trends in Neuroscience, 15, 428-434. The proof of Theorem 3 appears to be of independent Bienenstock, E. (1995). A model of neocortex. Network: Computation interest in the theory of sigmoidal neural nets, since it in Neural Systems, 6, 179-224. provides the strongest lower bound result for sigmoidal Bower. J. M., & Beeman, D. (1995). The book of GENESIS: exploring neural : . realistic neural models with the General Neural Simulation System. largest netspreviouslythat isknowncurrentlylowerknown.bound ItQ(n'")improves(Koiran,the Churchland,New York:P. S.,Springer.& Sejnowski, T. J. (1993). The computational brain. 1996) to Q(n). This new lower bound result is also of Cambridge: MIT Press. interest from the technical point of view, since it provides Crair, M. C., & Bialek, W. (1990). Non-Boltzmann dynamics in netthe first known application of recent results Sontag works of spiking neurons. In Advances in neural information (1997) about the ‘Sontag dimension”’ of neural nets. processingaurmann. systems, Vol. 2 (pp. 109-116). San Mateo: Morgan This is a new notion of a ‘‘dimension’’ for a neural net DasGupta, B., & Schnitger, G. (1993). The power of approximating: a that is in a certain sense dual to the familiar concept of comparison of activation functions. In Advances in neural informathe Vapnik—Chervonenkis dimension of a neural net (one tion processing systems, Vol. 5 (pp. 615-622). San Mateo: Morgan replaces “there EXIS(S a set S of d ,nputs...” by “for all Devons, MR. Findley, R. L., & Fields, C. (1992). The design, fabsets S of d inputs...”’ in the definition of the dimension). rication, and test of a new VLSI hybrid analog-digital neural proAs the references in this article indicate, the theoretical cessing element. IEEE Transcripts on Neural Networks, 3, 363investigation of networks of spiking neurons is not a new 374, 

1670 

W. Maass 

- Douglas, R. J., Koch, C., Mahowald, M., Martin, K. A. C., & Suarez, H. 

- H. (1995). Recurrent excitation in neocortical circuits. Science, 269, 981-985. 

- Ferster, D., & Spruston, N. (1995). Cracking the neuronal code. Science, 270, 756-757. 

- Gerstner, W. (1991). Associative memory in a network of ‘biological neurons’. In Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol. 3 (pp. 84-90). San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann. 

- Gerstner, W. (1995). Time structure of the activity in neural network models. Physics Review E, 51, 738-758. 

- Gerstner, W., & van Hemmen, J. L. (1994). How to describe neuronal activity: spikes, rates, or assemblies. In Advances in neural information processing systems. Vol. 6 (pp. 463-470). San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann. 

- Gerstner. W., Ritz, R.. & van Hemmen, J. L. (1993). A biologically motivated and analytically soluble model of collective oscillations in the cortex: I. Theory of weak locking. Biological Cybernetics, 68, 363-374. 

- Goldberg, P. W., & Jerrum, M. R. (1995). Bounding the Vapnik— Chervonenkis dimension of concept classes parameterized by real numbers. Machine Learning, 18, 131-148. 

- Herrmann, M., Hertz, J. A., & Priigel-Bennett, A. (in press). Analysis of synfire chains. Nordita Preprint. 

- Hopfield, J. J. (1995). Pattern recognition computation using action potential timing for stimulus representations. Nature, 376, 33-36. 

- Hopfield, J. J.. & Herz, A. V.M. (1995). Rapid local synchronization of action potentials: towards computation with coupled integrate-andfire neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 92. 6655-6662. 

- Horinchi, T., Lazzaro, J., Moore, A., & Koch, C. (1991). A delay-line based motion detection chip. In Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol. 3 (pp. 406-412). San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann. 

- Jahnke, A.. Roth, U., & Klar, H. (1996). A SIMD/dataflow architecture for a neurocomputer for spike-processing neural networks (NESPINN). MicroNeuro, 232-237. 

- Jiu, C. T.. & Leong, P. H. W. (1996). An analog VLSI time-encoded pattern classifier. In Proceedings of the 7th Australian Conference on Neural Networks (pp. 212~215). Canberra. 

- Johnston, D., & Wu, S. M. (1995). Foundations of cellular neurophisiology. Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Judd, K. T., & Aihara, K. (1993). Pulse propagation networks: a neural network model that uses temporal coding by action potentials. Neural Networks, 6, 203-215. 

- Karpinski, M.. & Macintyre, A. (in press). Polynomial bounds for VCdimension of sigmoidal and general Pfaffian neural networks. Journal of Computer and System Sciences. 

- Kempter, R., Gerstner, W., van Hemmen, J. L.. & Wagner, H. (1996). Temporal coding in the sub-millisecond range: model of barn owl auditory pathway. In Advances in neural information processing systems. Vol. 8 (pp. 124-130). Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Koch, C., & Poggio, T. (1992). Multiplying with synapses and neurons. In T. McKenna, J. Davis. & S. F. Zornetser (Eds.), Single neuron computation (pp. 315-346). Boston: Academic Press. 

- Koiran, P. (1996). VC-dimension in circuit complexity. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computational Complexity (pp. 81-85). 

- Kriiger, J., & Aiple, F. (1988). Multielectrode investigation of monkey striate cortex: spike train correlations in the infragranular layers. Journal of Neurophysiology. 60, 798-828. 

- Lapique, L. (1907). Recherches quantitatives sur !’excitation electrique des nerfs traitee comme une polarization. Journal of Physiology and Pathololgy, 9, 620-635. 

- Leshno, M.. Lin, V. Y., Pinkus, A., & Schocken, S. (1993). Multilayer feedforward networks with a nonpolynomial activation function can approximate any function. Neural Networks, 6, 861-867. 

- Lestienne, R. (1996). Determination of the precision of spike timing in the visual cortex of anaesthetised cats. Biological Cybernetics. 74, 55-61. 

- Maass, W. (1995a). Vapnik~Chervonenkis dimension of neural nets. In M. A. Arbib (Ed.), The handbook of brain theory and neural networks (pp. 1000-1003). Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Maass, W. (1995b). On the computational complexity of networks of spiking neurons. In Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol. 7 (183-190). Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Maass, W. (1995c). Analog computations on networks of spiking neurons. In Proceedings of the 7th Italian Workshop on Neural Nets. World Scientific Press, 99-104. 

- Maass, W. (1996a). Lower bounds for the computational power of networks of spiking neutrons. Neural Computation, 8(1), 1-40. 

- Maass, W. (1996b). On the computational power of noisy spiking neurons. In Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol. 8 (pp. 211-217). Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Maass, W. (1997). Fast sigmoidal networks via spiking neurons. Neural Computation, 9, 279-304. 

- Maass, W., & Orponen, P. (1997). On the effect of analog noise in discrete-time analog computations. Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol. 9. Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Maass, W., & Ruf, B. (1995). On the relevance of the shape of postsynaptic potentials for the computational power of spiking Neurons. Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, ICANN’9S (pp. 515-520). Paris: EC2&-Cie. 

- Maaas, W., & Schmitt, M. (1997). On the complexity of learning for a spiking neuron, Proc. of the 10th Conference on Computational Learning Theory 1997, ACM-Press, New York, Forthcoming. 

- Maass, W.. Schnitger. G.. & Sontag, E. (1991). On the computational power of sigmoid versus boolean threshold circuits. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (pp. 767-776). 

- Mahowald, M. (1992). VLSI. Analogs of neuronal visual processing: a syvathesis ofform and function, Ph.D. dissertation, California Institute of Technology. 

- Mahowald, M. (1994). An analog VLSI system for stereoscopic vision, Boston: Kluwer. 

- Mainen, Z. F., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1995). Reliability of spike timing in neocortical neurons. Science, 268. 1503~1506. 

- Mead, C. (1989). Anolog VLST and neural systems. Reading: AddisonWesley. 

- Meador, J. L.. Wu, A., Cole, C., Nintunze, N., & Chintrakulchai, P. (1991), Programmable impulse neural circuits. /EEE Transcripts on Neural Networks, 2, 101-109. 

- Murray, A. and Tarassenko, L. (1994). Analogue neural VLSI: a pulse stream approach, Chapman and Hall. 

- Northmore, D. P., & Elias, J. G. (1996). Discrimination ofspike patterns by dendritic processing in a network of silicon neuromorphs. In Proceedings of the Sth Annual Conference on Computational Neuroscience. San Diego: Academic Press. 

- Perrett. D. 1, Rolls, E. T., & Caan, W. C. (1982). Visual neurons responsive to faces in the monkey temporal cortex. Experimental Brain Research, 47, 329-342. 

- Pratt, G. A. (1989). Pulse computation. Ph.D. thesis, MIT, Cambridge. Rieke, F.. Warland, D.. van Stevenick, R.. & Bialek, W. (1996). SPIKES: exploring the neural code. Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Ritz. R.. Gerstner, W.. Fuentes, U.. & van Hemmen, L. (1994). A biologically motivated and analytically soluble model of collective ascillations in the cortex: H. Applications to binding and pattern segmentation. Biological Cybernetics, 71, 49-358. 

- Rolls, E. T. (1994). Brain mechanism for invariant visual recognition and learning. Behavioural Processes, 33, 113-138. 

- Rolls, E. T., & Tovee, M. J. (1994). Processing speed in the cerebral cortex, and the neurophysiology of visual backward masking. Proceedings of the Royal Society ofBritain, 257, 9-15. 

- Sejnowski, T. J. (1995). Time for a new neural code?. Nature, 376, 21-22. Shastri, L., & Ajjanagadde, V. (1993). From simple associations to systematic reasoning: a connectionist representation of rules, variables and dynamic bindings using temporal synchrony. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 16, 417-494. 

Networks of Spiking Neurons: The Third Generation of Neural Network Models 

1671 

- Shawe-Taylor, J., Jeavons, P., & Van Daalen, M. (1991). Probabilistic bit stream neural chip: theory. Connection Science, 3, 317-328. 

- Shepherd, G. M. (Ed.) (1990). The synaptic organization of the brain (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 

- Shepherd, G. M. (1994). Neurobiology (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. 

- Singer, W. (1995). Synchronization of neuronal responses as a putative binding mechanism. In M. A. Arbib (Ed.), The handbook of brain theory and neural networks (pp. 960-964). Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Softky, W. (1994). Sub-millisecond coincidence detection in active dendritic tree. Neuroscience, 58, 13-41. 

- Sontag, E. D. (1997). Shattering all sets of k points in "general position" requires (kK — 1)/2 parameters, Neural Computation, 9, 337-348. 

- C. F. Stevens, & Zador, A. (1996). Information through a spiking neuron. In Advances in neural information processing systems, Vol. 8 (pp. 75-81). Cambridge: MIT Press. 

- Taylor, J. G., & Alavi, F. N. (1993). Mathematical analysis of a competitive network for attention. In J. G. Taylor (Ed.), Mathematical approaches to neural network (pp. 341-382). Amsterdam: North Holland. 

- Thorpe, S. T., & Imbert, M. (1989). Biological constraints on connectionist modelling. In R. Pfeifer, Z. Schreter, F. FogelmanSoulié, & L. Steels (Eds.), Connectionism in perspective (pp. 6392). Amsterdam: Elsevier, North Holland. 

- Tuckwell, H. C. (1988). Introduction to theoretical neurobiology, Vols. 1 and 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

- Valiant, L. G. (1994). Circuits of the mind. Oxford University Press. Zaghloul, M. L., Meador, J. L., & Newcomb, R. W. (Eds.) (1994). Silicon implementations of pulse coded neural network. Kluwer. 

- Zhao, J. (1995). Stochastic bit stream neural networks: theory. simulations and applications. Ph.D. thesis, University of London, London. 

